JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: only
one week before
Election Day.
Donald Trump campaigns in
Pennsylvania, where
his poll numbers are lagging,
while Hillary
Clinton pushes for early voting
in Florida.
Then: a report from the front
lines in Iraq,
where the battle with ISIS
fighters grows
fierce, as government troops
close in on the
key city of Mosul.
And in the diverse state of
California, the
debate over bilingual education
challenges
ideas on the best way to teach
kids.
PATRICIA GANDARA, University of
California,
Los Angeles: We are blessed with
this richness
of languages.
And to not take advantage of
that, to not
let our kids have that
opportunity seems to
me just a tremendous waste.
RON UNZ, Opposes Proposition 58:
Bilingual
education doesn't work now.
It's never worked in the past.
And despite its advocates'
extremism ideological
commitment to that policy, it's
just totally
unsuccessful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're now within
the last seven
days, and some polls are
tightening in the
presidential race.
With that in mind, the two major
candidates
hit each other hard today on
policy and morality.
Lisa Desjardins begins our
coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: One week to go,
three new
elements today in Pennsylvania
to the look
and feel of Donald Trump's
sprint to Election
Day.
His running mate, Mike Pence,
was there, congressional
supporters were there, and his
address was
all policy, especially health
care, as he
pounded away at Obamacare and
its rising costs.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
When we win on November 8, and
elect a Republican
Congress, we will be able to
immediately repeal
and replace Obamacare.
Have to do it.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: I will ask
Congress to convene
a special session, so we can
repeal and replace.
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump's
Keystone State visit
is part of a final week push in
states that
voted twice for Barack Obama,
including Wisconsin,
where he is tonight.
And the campaign just announced
new ad buys
in usually dark blue Michigan
and in New Mexico,
which may be a late swing state.
Hillary Clinton is also airing
new ads in
both those states, and she's
getting back
on the air in Colorado, where
she had not
advertised since July.
Today, she was East in Florida,
the biggest
electoral jewel of all the
battlegrounds.
And her focus?
Trump's character.
She stumped with a former Miss
Universe, Alicia
Machado, who says Trump berated
her for her
weight.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
He thinks belittling women makes
him a bigger
man.
LISA DESJARDINS: And Clinton's
campaign coupled
that with a new anti-Trump TV
ad.
DONALD TRUMP: A person who's
flat-chested
is very hard to be a 10.
QUESTION: Do you treat women
with respect?
DONALD TRUMP: I can't say that
either.
LISA DESJARDINS: All this as a
flurry of new
headlines swirled around the
presidential
race.
The New York Times reported that
Trump, back
in the 1990s, used a tax scheme
that his own
lawyers questioned to save tens
of millions
of dollars.
NBC News reported the FBI is
conducting a
preliminary inquiry into Paul
Manafort, the
former Trump campaign chair, and
his foreign
business connections.
He was ousted from the campaign
in August
amid questions over possible
ties to Russia.
And CNBC was first to report
that FBI Director
James Comey had argued against
naming Russia
as the prime suspect in recent
political hacking.
He argued it was too close to
the election.
Clinton's campaign called that a
double standard,
given that Comey last week
revealed the FBI
is looking into more e-mails
related to Clinton's
use of a private server.
Overall, a wild presidential
contest is ending
with a storm of news and
battleground campaigning.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Iraqi
troops battled to make headway
on the eastern
edge of Mosul, two years after
being driven
out.
The military said special forces
advanced
and took a state television
building, despite
fierce resistance from Islamic
State fighters.
We will get a report from the
front lines
later in the program.
In Pakistan, the opposition
leader, Imran
Khan, backed off today from his
call for mass
protests in Islamabad.
The demonstrations were meant to
lock down
the capital and force embattled
Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif to resign.
He's under fire over his
family's offshore
bank holdings.
Supporters rallied at Khan's
home today after
Pakistan's highest court said
that it will
look into Sharif's finances.
IMRAN KHAN, Opposition Leader
(through translator):
Today, I was overjoyed that the
Supreme Court
decided Nawaz Sharif's
accountability will
soon begin.
We have decided that tomorrow we
will thank
God and celebrate a day of
thanks at Islamabad's
parade ground.
Tomorrow, God willing, we will
gather a million
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In recent days,
police have
used batons and tear gas to
enforce a ban
on rallies in Islamabad.
The government of Turkey today
rejected criticism
from Europe over its crackdown
on an opposition
newspaper.
Police arrested 13 top staffers
of the paper
yesterday, and the U.S. and the
European Union
condemned the move.
Today, the newspaper ran a
defiant headline
-- quote -- "We will not
surrender."
But the Turkish prime minister
shrugged it
all off in a televised address.
BINALI YILDIRIM, Turkish Prime
Minister (through
translator): Today, somebody
from the European
Parliament says the detention of
journalists
from that newspaper is a red
line.
Brother, we don't care about
your red line.
It's the Turkish people who draw
the red line.
What importance does your line
have?
JUDY WOODRUFF: The paper rejects
government
claims that its employees were
-- quote -- "supporting
terror" during last summer's
coup attempt.
Back in this country,
Philadelphia's public
transit workers went on strike
after failing
to reach a contract deal.
That brought bus, trolley, and
subway service
to a halt, affecting hundreds of
thousands
of riders.
Workers took to the picket lines
to demand
better pensions, health care and
shift scheduling.
No new talks have been
scheduled.
And on Wall Street, stocks
slipped over disappointing
earnings and concerns about the
presidential
race.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 105
points to close at 18037.
The Nasdaq fell 35, and the S&P
500 slid 14.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what we still
don't know about the candidates
one week before
Election Day; Iraqi forces push
into the ISIS-held
city of Mosul; the debate over
providing bilingual
education in public schools; and
much more.
We return now to the race for
the White House.
It's November 1, and voters who
haven't already
made a firm decision about what
they're going
to do, or even if they're going
to show up
at the polls, may be looking
around for new
information.
Meanwhile, new reports have
raised questions
about Donald Trump's ties to
Russia and his
business dealings.
And, of course, Hillary
Clinton's e-mail controversy
continues to unfold, which
raises the question:
What is known and what isn't
about both candidates?
And even if we learn more now,
will it make
a difference?
We're joined by Susan Page,
Washington bureau
chief for USA Today.
And Karen Tumulty, she's
national political
correspondent for The Washington
Post.
And welcome back to both of you.
We're glad to see you as the
clock is ticking
toward this election.
Susan, this is an unconventional
race.
It's been that way from the
beginning.
As we get close to Election Day,
how much
is known and not known about
these two candidates?
How different are they in that
regard?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
Well, let's talk about Donald
Trump.
I think a lot of Americans feel
like they
know him pretty well because
he's been a reality
TV star.
They have seen him.
They have seen stories about him
and his three
wives and his children.
But he's opaque in many of the
ways in which
we have usually expected
presidential candidates
to be transparent.
One is on his medical history.
He would be the oldest president
ever elected
in our history.
We have not seen the traditional
medical releases
that we have seen from other
presidential
contenders in modern times.
And on his finances, he's the
first major
party nominee in 40 years not to
release his
tax returns.
So there are things about
charitable contributions
or the degree to which he is in
debt to Russian
interests that we don't know
about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Karen, there
are big questions
still out there, and we're not
likely to know
the answers to all of these by
next Tuesday.
KAREN TUMULTY, The Washington
Post: No, we're
not, but there have been news
developments
that have sort of spoken to the
fact that
we don't have this information
or that people
have doubts about this
information.
Just today, The New York Times,
getting another
leak of some partial tax
documents, did a
big story where they did a deep
dive into
the tax law and did a story
about how hard
Donald Trump was pushing some of
the tax breaks
that were available, to the
point where his
own financial and legal advisers
were warning
him he was risking audits, using
parts of
the tax law that were later
changed.
Things that he did on his taxes
would be illegal
now.
All of that I think, though, is
going to be
read by Democrats, by Clinton
supporters as
just reinforcing what they
already thought
they knew about, you know, his
supposed malfeasance,
and among his own supporters
just further
proof that he's a financial
genius.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, and, Susan, a
story like
that comes out, but it does
remind us we don't
have the tax story.
This took a lot of digging just
to come up
with a little bit of information
from the
1990s.
SUSAN PAGE: And about a very
complicated equity-for-debt
swap -- don't ask me to describe
it any more
than that -- that Trump used.
It's almost, though, we haven't
flip side
with Hillary Clinton, because,
with her, we
know a lot about her.
She's been in the public eye for
decades.
We know a lot about her
finances.
She's been pretty public,
reasonably open
about her health.
But her own people argue that
you don't know
-- we don't know that much about
her, that
her personality that they
describe as warm,as
engaging is not something that I
think a lot
of voters have had a glimpse of.
So, it's like we -- we can ask,
what we do
know and what we don't know?
It's like there's a reverse when
you look
at the two of them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's right,
Karen.
We may know a lot about her, but
-- we have
her tax returns, for example,
but there is
still the private Hillary
Clinton.
KAREN TUMULTY: And what has
happened this
week, this week was a week where
the Clinton
campaign had planned to make a
big, aggressive,
positive case for her and for
her vision.
And, instead, what they have
found themselves
involved in is yet another
revival of the
e-mail controversy, this one not
involving
Hillary Clinton herself
directly, involving
her aide Huma Abedin and the
fact that some
more of her e-mails were found
in the most
unfortunate place, which is her
husband's
laptop, while he's under
investigation for
sexting a minor.
But what that does, we don't
know what's in
those e-mails, but what it does
is stir up
doubts, stir up reservations
that people had
already had about Hillary
Clinton and also,
Republicans are telling us, you
know, reminding
us this is what the next four to
eight years
are going to look like if she's
elected.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, meanwhile,
Susan, the
FBI, we noticed today, just
surprisingly,
out of the blue released
documents about their
investigation back in 19 -- in
2000, when
Bill Clinton was leaving office
about pardoning
Marc Rich, who was this
controversial financier.
Just -- it's as if everywhere
you turn, there's
a little bit of this and a
little bit of that.
SUSAN PAGE: And there are
long-term consequences
to the very messy end we see to
this campaign.
The FBI, for instance, posting
these documents,
they say they were responding to
a Freedom
of Information Act request, and
maybe that's
correct.
But it feeds the impression that
the FBI is
becoming a very political
institution as we
get to the end of this election,
that they
have talked -- the FBI director,
James Comey,
last Friday talked about the
investigation
into Hillary Clinton's e-mails
in a way that
is damaging for her, has really
curtailed
some of the momentum that we
thought she had
if we had been talking a week
ago about this
campaign, but not talking in the
same public
way about the investigations
into Donald Trump
and possible ties to Russian
interests.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Karen, when
you add it
all up, when you look at these
stories -- and
we haven't even talked about the
stories in
the last few days about Donald
Trump, connections
to Russia, his former campaign
manager, Paul
Manafort.
At this stage in a campaign,
historically,
how much are voters susceptible
to either
changing their mind, deciding
not to vote?
What is the information?
KAREN TUMULTY: Well, first of
all, at this
point, over 20 million voters
have already
voted.
So, their votes are in the bank.
But of that small population of
people who
have not yet made up their minds
between these
two candidates or whether they
are even going
to vote at all, history would
suggest that
these people are particularly
susceptible
to swinging with news
developments, swinging
with, you know, what's hitting
them hour by
hour.
SUSAN PAGE: You know, the Trump
supporters
are pretty enthusiastic about
him.
And so even if you get the
stories that we
got today about Donald Trump, I
think they're
unlikely to be discouraged.
Hillary Clinton supporters, she
has some very
enthusiastic supporters, but she
has some
supporters that are not as
enthusiastic about
her.
And that would include
African-Americans,
who are not as warm to her as
they were Barack
Obama, and also millennial
voters, voters
under 35, who historically have
not been very
reliable voters, but were an
important part
of the Obama coalition.
I think the risk for Hillary
Clinton isn't
that they will decide to vote
for Donald Trump.
It's that they will decide not
to vote at
all.
KAREN TUMULTY: And just as
important, down
the ballot, too.
A week ago, it really looked
like the Democrats
were in very good shape to take
back the Senate.
Now some of those races are sort
of getting
closer, back in play, in part
because the
Republicans are making the
argument, we need
a Republican Congress there as a
check on
Hillary Clinton, not just on her
agenda, but
on her administration's
behavior.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, it's as if
whether these
news stories change anything or
not, they
can either raise or suppress
people's interest
in this election and turning
out.
SUSAN PAGE: That's right.
And say these developments have
kept Hillary
Clinton from having the positive
close that
she thought she could have.
That could also have long-term
consequences
in whether people feel like she
has a mandate
for issues that she talked about
at the end,
when people were finally going
to the polls.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which is
something we're already
starting to talk about, whoever
wins this
election, what happens
afterwards?
How much of a mandate do they
have?
How much support do they have in
the country?
Karen Tumulty with The
Washington Post, Susan
Page with USA Today, thank you
so much.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
KAREN TUMULTY: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In our election
coverage online,
we visit the suburbs, long a
Republican stronghold,
but now trending Democratic, and
we explore
what this transformation means
for American
politics.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now let's turn to an election
story at the
state level.
There are important ballot
initiatives all
around the country.
Tonight, we look at one of those
battles,
over bilingual education in
California.
More than 9 percent of all
students in the
United States don't speak
English fluently.
They struggle more in school,
trailing behind
in every academic measure and at
every grade.
In California, that's true for
nearly one
in every four children, or
almost 1.5 million
kids.
Special correspondent Kavitha
Cardoza with
our partner Education Week
visited California,
where voters will soon decide
how to best
teach these children.
It's part of our weekly series
Making the
Grade.
KAVITHA CARDOZA, Education Week:
At a farmers
market in San Francisco, signs
of multiculturalism
are everywhere, a good place to
convince citizens
to vote in favor of allowing
bilingual education
in California schools.
SHELLY SPIEGEL-COLEMAN,
Californians Together:
Hi.
We're here with information
about Proposition
58 that's going to be on the
ballot in November.
What Proposition 58 will do will
really put
the decision-making back into
the hands of
the people closest to the
students, the parents
and the schools.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Almost 20 years
ago, Californians
overwhelmingly voted in favor of
doing exactly
the opposite, voting for a
proposition which
required students who didn't
speak English
fluently to be taught only in
English.
Most bilingual programs closed.
A Silicon Valley software
developer was the
architect of the successful
English-only proposition
back then.
Ron Unz remains opposed today.
You're not a parent or a teacher
or a researcher.
How did this become your issue?
RON UNZ, Opposes Proposition 58:
Well, I come
from a little bit of an
immigrant background
myself, in that my mother was
born in Los
Angeles, but grew up not
speaking a word of
English.
She learned English very quickly
and easily
when she started kindergarten.
And that really was the same
case with many
other people she knew.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Unz says
learning English
quickly is key to assimilating
in the U.S.
RON UNZ: Bilingual education
doesn't work
now.
It's never worked in the past.
And despite its advocates'
extremism ideological
commitment to that policy, it's
just totally
unsuccessful.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: California
State Senator
Ricardo Lara agrees that
learning English
is key.
He disagrees on how to get
there.
Among his five siblings, he and
his sister
did well in an English-only
environment.
His other three siblings
struggled, until
they switched to bilingual
schools.
Then they began to excel
academically.
RICARDO LARA (D), California
State Senator:
Kids learn differently, and we
all know that
that's a fact now.
So why are we going to have a
one cookie-cutter,
one-size-fits-all approach to
learning English
in California, which is one of
the most diverse
states?
KAVITHA CARDOZA: State senator
Lara is sponsoring
Proposition 58, which will make
it easier
for local school districts to
expand bilingual
education.
He says it's part of a broader
cultural shift
in the past 20 years.
Globalization has made knowing
more than one
language a benefit, rather than
a burden.
Adelante Spanish Immersion
School saw the
benefit 20 years ago.
They managed to keep their
bilingual programs
intact.
Principal Christine Hiltbrand
says much of
the demand is being driven by
middle-class,
educated parents.
CHRISTINE HILTBRAND, Principal,
Adelante Spanish
Immersion School: We had about
100 kids on
the wait-list.
And the district, because of
that popularity,
has opened a second Spanish
immersion school.
And that's full, too.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Their method is
called dual-language
immersion.
Half the student body speaks
English at home,
half speak Spanish.
In early years, children here
spend most of
their time learning all their
subjects in
Spanish.
Gradually more classes are
taught in English,
until the fourth grade, when
they spend exactly
half the time in each language.
Learning a second language was
hard at first,
but Arianna Baca says it gets
easier.
ARIANNA BACA, Student: And then
I'm like,
oh, so now it's English time,
and now I speak
in English.
And my brain just switches off.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Children say
knowing two
languages is useful, even beyond
school.
ANDREW TINSON, Student:
Sometimes, I use Spanish
when I go to, like, a market
because, sometimes
people at the market, they speak
Spanish.
And, also, I went to Spain, and
so everybody
there speaks Spanish, so it was
very useful.
MARVIN GARRIDO, Student: My mom
works cleaning
houses, and sometimes she wants
to, like,
send messages to her boss to
clean the house.
Sometimes, she wants me to help
her to put
what to say and stuff like that.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Laurie Olsen is
a bilingual
advocate.
LAURIE OLSEN, Bilingual
Advocate: Proficiency
in two or more languages is
important.
It's a skill.
It's a high-level skill.
We as a society need people who
can be the
firefighters and the service
providers and
the doctors and the diplomats
that have the
ability to speak across
languages and communities.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: There's a broad
coalition
in favor of giving school
districts the option
of bilingual education.
But critics like Ron Unz remain
unconvinced.
RON UNZ: And I think it would be
very ridiculous
for the state to consider moving
back to the
old Spanish almost-only system,
or so-called
bilingual education.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: He points out,
after the
English-only proposition passed,
test scores
went up.
But that's only half the story.
Though there was an initial
bump, when researchers
followed these children over
time, they found,
by middle school, those in
English-only classes
struggled, because it's hard to
keep up with,
say, history or science if you
don't fully
understand what's being said.
Only those in bilingual classes
continued
to do well in school.
How does Adelante stack up?
Student scores are seven points
higher in
reading than the state average,
and 13 points
higher in math.
And by fifth grade, children are
fully bilingual.
Patricia Gandara is a researcher
with the
University of California, Los
Angeles.
PATRICIA GANDARA, University of
California,
Los Angeles: Because we now know
definitively
that there are huge advantages,
advantages
in employment, advantages --
social advantages,
psychological advantages.
There are -- and cognitive
advantages.
It just seems to me to be such a
shame that
we are an immigrant country.
We are blessed with this
richness of languages.
And to not take advantage of
that, to not
let our kids have that
opportunity seems to
me just a tremendous waste, a
tremendous waste
of resources.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: Recent polling
in California
suggests voters support more
bilingual programs.
Spiegel-Coleman says, 20 years
ago, attitudes
were different.
SHELLY SPIEGEL-COLEMAN: We
would've gotten
dirty looks.
We would've been insulted.
People would have said things to
us like,
that's the Spanish-only program,
they should
be learning English.
We didn't get any of that today.
KAVITHA CARDOZA: She's hoping
those changed
attitudes will translate into
votes this November.
For the "PBS NewsHour" and
Education Week,
I'm Kavitha Cardoza reporting
from San Francisco.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": are
political
strategists worth the millions
they're paid?;
the struggle to find health
insurance coverage
for children with autism; and
why conservative
voters in some of the states
that need federal
assistance don't trust the
government.
But first: As we reported
earlier, Iraqi troops
crossed the city limits of the
ISIS-held city
of Mosul today.
Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi
said that the
militants two choices are --
quote -- "surrender
or die."
Iraqi special forces fought into
the city's
eastern outskirts at Gogjali.
The road there has been long and
dangerous.
Special correspondent
Christopher Livesay
was there as the troops moved
in.
And he filed this report.
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY: This is the
road to Mosul,
littered with the scorched
debris of ISIS
in retreat.
But they are not going quietly.
The sky is black with smoke
billowing from
the oil fields ISIS has set
ablaze.
The terror group held this
territory for more
than two years, and, in that
time, they built
an elaborate industry to
manufacture IEDs
and suicide car bombs.
Only now can they see that up
close.
This is a suicide car that they
were in the
process of packing with TNT,
but, apparently,
they didn't have enough time
before the invasion
started.
So, they had to run out.
But it's still packed with
explosives.
The suicide car bomber appeared
to have gotten
away and set off the fighting
this morning
in Gogjali, a neighborhood in
the outskirts
of Mosul, near an army Iraq
roadblock.
And these soldiers with a
.50-caliber machine
gun?
MAN: Machine gun?
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY: They were
able to stop
him.
But the driver was still able to
detonate
his vehicle.
His body is now covered by
debris, his vehicle
lodged in the roadblock.
The forces moving on ISIS
territory are varied,
including Shia militias backed
by Iran and
security forces from the Kurdish
region known
as Peshmerga.
But it's the Iraq army that is
leading the
charge in Mosul proper.
By midday, the ISIS side of the
battlefront
was still for a moment.
And these terrified civilians
saw their chance
to flee the Islamic State after
two years
of captivity.
They are the lucky ones.
Reports are mounting of ISIS
rounding up locals
by the thousands to use as human
shields inside
Mosul.
One mother didn't even have time
to stop and
give her name.
WOMAN (through translator): The
last time
we tried to run away, they shot
at us.
This time, we had to stay very
low, so they
couldn't hit us.
Today was the first chance that
we had.
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY: We found
this 20-year-old
shepherd fleeing east with his
flock, searching
for shelter in hastily built
refugee camps.
He said ISIS wouldn't allow him
to attend
school and punished him for
breaking strict
Islamic dress codes.
MAN (through translator): I
spent five days
in jail for wearing long pants.
They beat me in there, lashed
me.
Now I know I'm in a safe place,
thank God.
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY: But the
relief is bittersweet.
He had to leave behind his
parents, brothers
and sisters.
Just when the coast looked
clear, ISIS proved
it wasn't giving up without a
fight.
(GUNFIRE)
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY: Gunfire
cracks all around.
At least one Iraqi soldier is
shot dead.
But Iraqi special forces are
quick to rally
and return fire on virtually
every building
lining this road that leads to
the heart of
Mosul.
MAN (through translator): We are
waiting to
go inside the city of Mosul.
Mosul is our land.
We will enter in three or four
days.
God willing, we will fly our
flag on the city.
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY: But the
violence shows
no signs of ceasing, as troops
move deeper
into Mosul, and there is no
telling how long
the city's total liberation will
take.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Christopher Livesay
in Gogjali, Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Regardless of the
outcome on
Election Day, political
scientists have already
begun studying this
groundbreaking campaign.
One tantalizing subject: the
true value of
political consultants.
Are they worth the millions they
charge politicians
each year?
"Atlantic" magazine writer Molly
Ball explores
this question in her article,
"There's Nothing
Better Than a Scared, Rich
Candidate."
What a great quote.
(LAUGHTER)
MOLLY BALL, "The Atlantic": Yes.
That is a quotation from a book
by a political
scientist about the political
consulting industry.
And it's something that a
consultant said
to him that just really summed
up what I was
getting at with this article,
which was kind
of asking the question, is this
all a con
game, this political consulting
racket?
Candidates are spending billions
of dollars,
and what are they really getting
for it?
Or is it just the consultants
lining their
pockets?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, this is a
question that
has been asked for some time,
but it comes
into particular relief this
year, doesn't
it?
MOLLY BALL: That's right.
I mean, first of all, look at
what happened
particularly in the Republican
primaries.
You had the two extremes.
You had Jeb Bush spent $130
million, end up
with four delegates.
JEB BUSH (R), Former Florida
Governor: I'm
Jeb Bush, and I approve this
message.
MOLLY BALL: Donald Trump spent
almost nothing.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I'm not doing that to brag,
because you know
what?
I don't have to brag.
I don't have to, believe it or
not.
MOLLY BALL: Had no experienced
consultants
on his staff, nobody who'd ever
run a presidential
campaign before, and barely
advertised on
television, didn't do any of the
tactical
stuff we're used to and we write
about so
much, building of field
operation and having
a communications shop and all of
that stuff.
And he won the whole thing.
DONALD TRUMP: I humbly and
gratefully accept
your nomination.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
MOLLY BALL: So, the question is,
does that
mean the emperor has no clothes?
Does that mean that all this
spending -- there's
more money in politics than ever
before.
Because of the way campaign
finance has been
deregulated, donor money is
pouring into the
political process.
There's, by one estimate, $6
billion this
year alone.
Where is all that money going,
what is it
doing, and is it having any
effect?
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you spent
time talking
with one of the people who was
key in the
Jeb Bush campaign, Mike Murphy,
somebody who's
been around for a while in
American Republican
politics.
And what did you find from
talking to him
about what the plan was and how
he saw his
ability to shape the campaign?
MOLLY BALL: Yes.
Well, I want to make it clear
that I'm not
really picking on Mike Murphy.
He's just an exemplar of this
phenomenon.
But it's a pretty perfect
example of a campaign
that spent a lot of money, had a
very professional
staff, and didn't achieve any
results.
Mike Murphy's explanation was,
this just wasn't
the year for a candidate like
Jeb Bush.
And I think that's certainly
true in retrospect,
in hindsight.
But he said that, we had to have
all that
money because it was the only
way we could
have gone against the headwinds
we were facing.
And nobody could have
anticipated the magnitude
of the electorate's appetite for
what he terms
a grievance candidate.
But, you know, the donors that I
spoke to,
the people who were giving Jeb
Bush $100 million,
they expect the consultants to
see those things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For all the
controversy, the
questions around political
consultants, some
of them have achieved near
mythic status,
James Carville from the Bill
Clinton campaign
of years ago, Karl Rove from
George W. Bush's
campaign.
They really helped make these
candidates who
they were, didn't they?
MOLLY BALL: This is really a
modern phenomenon
of the consultants as a
celebrity in his or
her own right.
Political consulting gets
started back in
the 1930s, but they were really
sort of anonymous
figures until really in the
1990s.
Political journalism really
started focusing
on these sort of Oz-like
figures, right, the
man behind the curtain pulling
the strings.
GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS, Political
Consultant:
I just took it as a good sign,
because I don't
think they would call back if
they weren't
considering.
MOLLY BALL: And so you do have
-- you know,
you have the documentary "The
War Room" about
James Carville and George
Stephanopoulos in
the '90s.
JAMES CARVILLE, Political
Consultant: It's
going to come out that Roger
Ailes is behind
a lot of this stuff before an
election.
MOLLY BALL: Those men are now
famous in their
own right.
Karl Rove was supposedly George
W. Bush's
brain, right?
Bush is, in this scenario, sort
of a hapless
pawn, and Rove is calling all
the shots.
But, you know, part of why we
turn consultants
into heroes like this is because
partisans,
particularly on the losing side,
want to believe
that there was some kind of
hidden genius.
It wasn't that their candidate
wasn't good
enough and people didn't like
what they were
offering, and voters rejected
them.
It's that there was this, you
know, sinister
Svengali on the other side who
had some kind
of magical ability to control
the electorate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is it possible to
know how
much of a campaign and a
candidate's performance
in a campaign is thanks to the
consultant
and how much of it is the
candidate himself
or herself?
MOLLY BALL: It's very difficult.
I mean, political scientists
actually love
the Donald Trump campaign,
because it's sort
of a control for the experiment,
right?
Because there has been so little
consultant
input to Donald Trump's
presentation, you
can sort of isolate the effect
of a candidate
on his own with his particular
charisma and
no particular shaping or help,
at least until
the very late stages of his
campaign.
But, in general, political
scientists have
been studying this for decades.
A real landmark of this type of
study was
done when Rick Perry was running
for governor
of Texas in 2010, and the
consultants running
his campaign actually allowed a
group of political
scientists to run a randomized
controlled
experiment, where they ran ads
in one part
of Texas.
GOV.
RICK PERRY (R), Texas: I'm proud
of Texas.
How about you?
MOLLY BALL: They didn't run any
ads in the
other part of Texas.
And these were pretty similar
populations,
so they could really see, what
was the effect?
How much did people in this part
of Texas
like Rick Perry more, having
seen his ads,
vs. the people in this other
place?
And they did find there was a
small effect,
about five points.
But it was gone within a week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And yet certain
political ads
are seared in our collective
memory as game-changers,
such as the so called "Daisy" ad
Lyndon Johnson
ran against Barry Goldwater in
1964.
MAN: Two, one, zero.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Or the
windsurfing ad run against
John Kerry in 2004.
NARRATOR: John Kerry, whichever
way the wind
blows.
MOLLY BALL: What the consultants
will tell
you is that the kind of
mythmaking that we
journalists engage in, where we
say, this
ad was the turning point, that's
basically
false.
It was the fundamental factors
driving the
electorate that led to one
candidate winning
or losing.
John Kerry, according to the
political consultants,
was almost certainly going to
lose that election
anyway, given the makeup of the
race, being
up against an incumbent, the
economy doing
how it was doing.
And LBJ almost certainly would
have won that
election without the "Daisy" ad.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did you come away
with a sense
of what tactics can work and
which ones are
increasingly not shown to be
effective?
MOLLY BALL: You do see an
increasing emphasis
on field organizing, as opposed
to advertising.
You see this with labor and with
particularly
Democratic presidential
campaigns.
And there is a much more
conclusive evidence
in the political science
literature that this
kind of thing actually works.
The Obama campaign really
pioneered this model
of intensive field organizing,
hundreds of
campaign offices all over the
country.
But you need a candidate who's
compelling
enough to attract a lot of
volunteers to make
an effort like that work.
You can't just pay for it all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To what extent
are these consultants
doing this to make money?
How much do they really care
about what happens
in the political process?
Are they committed to a
particular ideology?
MOLLY BALL: Well, I attended the
convention
of the American Association of
Political Consultants.
And the consultants will tell
you that they
are in this because they want to
make the
world a better place.
Most of them only work for one
side.
They're either a Democratic
consultant or
a Republican consultant.
And so they're trying to advance
this vision
of the world, trying to achieve
changes in
policy by helping candidates get
elected.
But they will admit they also
have to make
a living.
MAN: It's me, candidate for
president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At this
conference you covered,
they showed a generic political
ad.
Talk about what was in that ad
and what the
reaction was.
MOLLY BALL: This was a pretty
incredible video.
It was completely generic.
There's a sort of generic white
man walking
through a generic field, and
there's images
of American flags, welders in a
factory, all
of the things that might come to
mind when
you imagine a generic political
ad.
And the message it was sending
was, these
candidates are just someone that
the consultant
sticks in there to read the
script, and they
could all pretty much be saying
the same thing.
They're all pretty much
interchangeable.
MAN: I'm a candidate for
president, and I
endorse this message.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which is enough
to make one
pretty cynical about this.
MOLLY BALL: I think it is.
And I think that this actually
goes some way
to explaining the appeal of
Donald Trump to
so many voters.
He is not someone who seems like
someone is
managing him, to put it lightly.
He seems utterly authentic in a
way that is
frequently offensive, but he
comes across
as unfiltered.
And I think, in some ways, the
attraction
of a candidate like that is, in
part, voters'
reaction to the influence of
consultants and
how choreographed and how stale
and how totally
staged and scripted so much of
our political
process has come to feel,
because it has become
so homogenized by the influence
of consulting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today is the
first day of enrollment
for 2017 under the Affordable
Care Act, otherwise
known as Obamacare.
But for some people who have
health insurance,
getting appropriate coverage can
be a challenge.
More than 43 million Americans
suffer from
depression, anxiety or other
mental health
issues, but more than half never
get help,
even people who have health
insurance.
From PBS station KQED in San
Francisco, reporter
April Dembosky and producer
Sheraz Sadiq bring
us a story of a single mother
struggling to
use her benefits to get
treatment for herself
and her son with autism.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: On a Sunday
afternoon, Natalie
Dunnege and her boyfriend,
Russell Lifson,
head to the park with Natalie's
13-year-old
son, Strazh.
MAN: Let's go.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: He has autism, a
developmental
disorder that affects about one
in 70 children
in the U.S.
STRAZH, Autistic: You have
strengths on one
side of your brain and
weaknesses on your
other side, like, you know,
controlling your
emotions or this and that, you
know?
Strengths could be like coding
or, you know,
focusing on one thing for hours.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: Each week, an
applied behavioral
analysis, or ABA, therapist
comes to the house.
WOMAN: Are you ready?
APRIL DEMBOSKY: ABA therapy
helps kids with
autism learn life skills and how
to control
their temper.
Strazh and his therapist, Gabby
Raders (ph),
create a schedule of carefully
timed activities,
so he can get better at
transitions.
STRAZH: This is the I.D., right,
the identification
with the enemy.
This is the width, height, speed
X and speed
Y.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: Ending a
favorite activity
can trigger a meltdown.
STRAZH: I can't do it.
No, I can't.
NATALIE DUNNEGE, Mother of
Strazh: ABA therapy
has helped my relationship with
Strazh tremendously.
It's taught me how to
communicate with him,
when to back away, when to come
in and help.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: As a single mom
working full-time,
money is tight for Natalie.
She can only afford a few hours
of ABA therapy
a week.
NATALIE DUNNEGE: I want my son
to be as successful
as possible, so every time I get
a raise,
I just increase ABA hours.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: She has
insurance through
Blue Shield.
But getting mental health
treatment has been
really tough.
NATALIE DUNNEGE: So, I went on
the site.
And then you can see it says,
like, doctors,
facilities, dentists, nothing
about where
to find a therapist.
I called them, and they e-mailed
me a list
of providers.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: Oh, so this is
the list?
NATALIE DUNNEGE: Mm-hmm.
Yes.
They all have a three-month
waiting list.
And then, after the three-month
waiting list,
you have, like, two to eight
weeks of intake.
And then hopefully you get
approved.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: So, she pays $50
an hour,
out of her own pocket, for her
son's therapy.
And now she's facing similar
hurdles finding
a therapist for herself.
NATALIE DUNNEGE: Blue Shield
sent me a list,
like, I should be fine, just
make a few phone
calls, I will find somebody.
I called everybody on this list.
Only one place called me back.
I have to be as emotionally
healthy as possible,
so that I can be there for
Strazh, because
he has good weeks and he has bad
weeks.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: Turns out that
Natalie's experience
is by no means unique.
I called 100 psychologists in
San Francisco
who take Natalie's insurance.
I'm wondering if you are indeed
taking new
patients with Blue Shield
coverage?
Half said they're no longer
taking insurance
or new patients, and a quarter
never even
called back.
Thanks so much.
Bye-bye.
Only eight had appointments
outside of normal
work hours.
I contacted Blue Shield for an
interview,
but they declined.
Instead, they sent a statement
saying that
the provider has to notify Blue
Shield if
they're no longer taking new
patients.
They also said California is
facing a shortage
of mental health providers.
DR.
CATHERINE HOPMAN, Psychologist:
Insurance
companies are saying that
there's a shortage
of mental health providers?
That's hard for me to believe.
I have many colleagues who are
trying to get
onto panels.
And they run into the problem,
again and again,
where panels say, sorry, we're
closed.
We have enough providers in your
area.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: Dr. Hopman is a
psychologist
who accepts a variety of
insurance plans.
She can get up to 20 calls a
week from people
asking for her help.
DR.
CATHERINE HOPMAN: It makes me
really angry.
It really is upsetting, and it
makes me wonder,
what are the insurance panels
doing and why
are they limiting how many
therapists they
take on onto their panels?
APRIL DEMBOSKY: Why do you think
they might
be limiting the number of
therapists?
DR.
CATHERINE HOPMAN: If you make
things too difficult
to access, then patients will
stop trying
to seek the therapy and the
treatment that
they need.
And I guess part of me thinks
that that's
probably a good thing for the
insurance companies.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: Another
difficulty patients
face is outdated or missing
information about
a therapist's specialty.
DR.
CATHERINE HOPMAN: So, for
instance, if I need
a cardiologist for a heart
problem, and I
just get a list of all M.D.s
that are on my
health insurance panel, I'm not
going to know
who to call about my particular
issue that
I'm needing help with.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: Many therapists
complain that
reimbursement rates are too low.
DR.
CATHERINE HOPMAN: Over the past
18 years of
being on their panels, they have
not increased
their reimbursement rates.
And yet the co-pays and premiums
are increasing
for most of my patients.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: Under state and
federal laws,
insurance plans must cover
mental health services
equally compared to other forms
of care.
But millions of patients across
the country
like Natalie Dunnege and her son
Strazh still
struggle to get the help they
need.
MAN: We're almost done with
this.
I like that.
NATALIE DUNNEGE: Getting
services through
my plan, the hardest one by far
is getting
mental health services.
There's nothing more difficult.
I needed to find a doctor.
I found one instantly.
But mental health, behavioral
health, psychiatrists,
to have that be even harder,
it's almost unbearable
sometimes.
MAN: Good night.
APRIL DEMBOSKY: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
April Dembosky in San Francisco.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now back to the
campaign and
to the latest edition in our
Political Ink
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now back to the
campaign and
to the latest edition in our
Political Ink
series.
We look at what is behind some
of the underlying
anger that has permeated this
election.
Jeffrey Brown is in charge.
JEFFREY BROWN: From Berkeley,
California,
to the Louisiana bayou country,
several thousand
miles and a deep political and
cultural divide.
In the new book "Strangers in
Their Own Land:
Anger and Mourning on the
American Right,"
Berkeley sociologist Arlie
Russell Hochschild
draws a portrait of that divide
through the
lives of people in and around
Lake Charles,
Louisiana.
And the book has just been
nominated for a
National Book Award.
So, welcome and congratulations.
ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD,
Author, "Strangers
in Their Own Land: Anger and
Mourning on the
American Right": Thank you.
JEFFREY BROWN: You start by
writing that you
were looking for an answer to a
great paradox
in American political life.
Explain that.
ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD: And
that is that
the red states are states with a
lot of needs,
needs for their schools, needs
for their health.
They have lower life expectancy,
more disruptive
families.
They depend more on the federal
government
than blue states.
And they resist and distrust the
federal government
more.
And Louisiana seemed to
exaggerate that, as
the poorest state, as receiving
44 percent
of its state budget from the
federal government,
and being overwhelmingly very
conservative.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you -- and
you're clear
throughout this book you're
coming from not
only a blue state, but a capital
of blue culture,
right, from Berkeley,
California.
So, you're coming as an outsider
to see what?
ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD: To
take my own alarm
system off and to try and cross
an empathy
wall and to really understand
mainly why it
is people feel so negatively
about the federal
government.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, your way in
is through
the environment, environmental
damage, well-documented
in Louisiana.
ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD: That's
right.
JEFFREY BROWN: But the people
that you're
talking to, they don't see
government as the
answer.
You see, coming from the outside
-- you would
imagine that they would.
ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD: Right.
I would imagine that they would.
And they are victims of
tremendous pollution.
There are different reasons why
they don't
like the federal government.
One is, they think of the
federal government
as the finger-wagging North,
always with its
moral judgment.
JEFFREY BROWN: There's much
history there,
yes.
ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD: Much
history.
The second is, they see the
companies as the
givers of jobs and gifts, gifts
which the
company can afford because the
state is giving
it $1.5 billion.
It's given to the Audubon
Society and various
things.
So, the state looks -- the
company looks very
generous, and the state doesn't
really regulate
the polluters.
And so victims of the pollution
blame the
state.
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, and, in
fact, as they
tell you over and over again,
the evidence
they see is that they have not
been benefited.
So, why would they look to
government for
more regulation?
ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD: I
understand that,
actually, in a way I didn't when
I set out.
But I feel like the companies
are making the
state do the moral dirty work of
not -- promising
to protect, but not protecting.
But there's another reason that
I think that
they don't trust the government.
They see it as an instrument of
their own
marginalization, because they
feel especially
Democratic administrations have
favored blacks,
women, immigrants, refugees.
And all of these groups, they
see as getting
ahead of them, as almost like
line-cutters,
pushing them back in line.
JEFFREY BROWN: I know you
started this several
years ago, but, of course, here
we are in
the middle of a campaign.
What does Donald Trump offer?
What do they see in him?
ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD: I feel
as if I had
studied for four years the
kindling, and then,
when I went to see Donald Trump
in his primary
rally in New Orleans, I saw the
match that
lit the kindling.
They see in him someone who
recognizes their
sense of loss and discouragement
and someone
who is going to rescue them,
almost in a secular
rapture.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, where does
this all leave
you, personally and in thinking
about the
country?
ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD: I
think it leads
me to realize that we have a job
to do to
heal this big divide, and that
it's a very
important thing for us to do it
at this political
moment, and that...
JEFFREY BROWN: Is it doable?
ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD: It is
doable.
It leaves me optimistic,
because, for example,
there are crossover issues.
I heard many people say, let's
get money out
of politics.
I thought, well, the two sides
can agree on
that.
And let's clean up this
environment for real.
And two sides can agree on that.
Let's lower prison populations.
Two sides can agree on that.
Let's stop insulting each other
and really
get to know people.
I mean, have a few beers and go
on a fishing
trip, and you will find a friend
who won't
see the world the way you do,
but where you
can have a really good
conversation about
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: The book is
"Strangers in Their
Own Land."
Arlie Russell Hochschild, thank
you very much.
ARLIE RUSSELL HOCHSCHILD: Thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tune in later
this evening
on PBS for the final episode of
"The Contenders
- 16 for '16," which has focused
on the different
strategies used by former
presidential candidates
over the years as they try to
win the White
House.
Tonight's features the campaign
of President
Obama, and that of his
predecessor, President
George W. Bush.
Here's a look.
RAMESH PONNURU, The National
Review: George
W. Bush differed from his father
in a number
of ways.
He differed from him in being
more conservative.
His father had been from
Connecticut.
He was raised in Texas.
And he really played that up.
You know, he had the cowboy
boots.
JOHN HOCKENBERRY, Journalist and
Radio Host:
If you look at the stories of
the Bush family,
he wasn't the one who was
expected to make
it to the White House.
Jeb was seen as more credible.
Jeb was seen as maybe smarter.
JACOB WEISBERG, Slate.com: The
whole family
took the 1992 loss incredibly
hard.
TOM BROKAW, NBC News: We have a
whole run
of presidential projections for
you.
They all belong to Bill Clinton.
He has passed the magic number
of 270.
BILL CLINTON, President of the
United States:
I, William Jefferson Clinton, do
solemnly
swear.
JACOB WEISBERG: They had to
redeem the family
name through winning another
election.
And, of course, the great
question became
whether it was going to be Jeb
or George W.
DAVID AXELROD, Obama Campaign
Chief Strategist:
People ask me, why do you think
you can win
Iowa.
I think, if we're in a close
race, these kids
are going to win it.
They think they're changing the
world.
ROBERT GIBBS, Obama Campaign
Strategist: The
good news is, I think they are.
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader:
The next president of the United
States!
KARL ROVE, Former Senior Adviser
to President
George W. Bush: What led me to
believe he
could win the nomination was the
speech in
Des Moines, the
Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner
Speech.
You could just see the crowd
reacting to this.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I don't want to pit red America
against blue
America.
I want to be the president of
the United States
of America.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: "The Contenders -
16 for '16"
airs tonight on most PBS
stations.
And tune in later tonight.
On "Charlie Rose," presidential
historian
Jon Meacham will join Charlie.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.